okay this is a screencast on async
JavaScript so sometimes we don't know
how long a line of code will take to run
if you think about say uploading an
image or a video from an app like so
though these things might take a really
really long time to run or even like
asking our user for a bit of input we
might have a line of code that says like
upload video and like that might take
like like several minutes to complete
and we don't want to have to wait around
for it to finish before we do anything
else like it'll be really bad if like
the moment we started trying to upload
an image like all of our app was like
unresponsive because we couldn't run any
other code whilst the upload code was
running so we we need to be able to run
other code to like respond to like user
input or like respond to other things
happening whilst our upload is still
running and that's a little bit
different to what we've been doing so
far so far every single line of code
that we've written we they've been
running like one after the other with
the exception of like functions this
sort of change change flow a little bit
but even then like each line of code
waits for the previous one to finish
before it can start and that's called
synchronous programming so each line
runs in order one by one and we can
describe those lines those actions
functions whatever they are as blocking
so each line blocks the next one until
it's finished
we can't step start the next thing until
the thing that we're currently blocked
on has all like finished up in
asynchronous code our lines run out of
order so we don't necessarily have to
wait to slow things get down so we could
also we don't necessarily have to wait
for like really slow things to finish
before we move on so we could also
describe that as non blocking so
particular like lines of code or
instructions don't block each other the
next one can start running before the
finish previous one has finished now
this is like a little bit confusing and
kind of unusual compared to what we used
to before and don't worry we're not
gonna like be completely changing in
everything the majority of your code
will still be synchronous but you will
have the occasional asynchronous
function to allow for things like making
web requests and that sort of thing
which otherwise would take a long time
and node and JavaScript encourage you to
be like async by default if you think
back to when we did the file reading and
marketing stuff you had to do use some
functions called like read file sync and
write file sync which are the
synchronous versions of those methods so
ones that block and then they won't move
on to the next line until that lines
finished whereas the normal ones just
read fire and write file are what we
call asynchronous so yeah not all of
your code has to be async just the
things that are going to like
potentially take an unknown or like long
amount of time so thinking about async
code in JavaScript there's a few
different ways that people like to write
async code three different sort of main
things that you're likely to come across
they were callbacks something called
promises and the newest thing in like
the newest version of javascript is
async await syntax and don't worry about
what these are particularly the main
thing is that the callbacks are like
really the fundamental fundamental thing
and then promises an async await are
sort of they're built on top of call
backs and they're designed to make
things like a little bit easier or more
like predictable to use but like the
fundamental core concept behind them is
still callbacks so it's really important
to learn callbacks
like understand how they work before
trying to learn promises or async/await
syntax so we're only gonna be focusing
on callbacks in launchpad I do like
encourage you to go and read up on the
other two things as well like read up on
promises and once you've really got a
firm handle and promises read up on
async/await
because all of these three things sort
of build on each other promises build on
callbacks and async/await
build on on promises and you can't
really understand any of them before you
understand understood like the
fundamental concept behind it so what's
a callback a callback is a function that
gets called to let us know where a slow
thing has finished so if we are
uploading our video from our app then
we've maybe use a callback to tell us
when that upload is complete and maybe
show a message to the user saying oh we
finished uploading that's basically all
there is to it so we're gonna look at
this example to start off with set
timeout so you might have seen this this
is like one of the simplest ways of
doing async stuff in JavaScript set
timeout creates a something like a timer
so you give it two inputs a callback
function which we're gonna look at in a
moment and a delay and the callback is
the function to call when the timer is
up so this is going to create a timer
for like delay milliseconds however long
that is and then after that time is
passed it's gonna call callback so if we
put a thousand in the delay milliseconds
input then after one second because
there's a thousand milliseconds in a
second then our callback function would
get called let's have a look at this so
I've already got the workshop folder
cloned and I've I've seeded into it
and I've got it open in my editor here
as well and what I'm going to do is just
create a new file and I'm gonna call it
timers test dot J's I'm gonna put it in
the main the main thing max you test
isn't a great name because it's not like
a test file timers experiment that's a
better name and we can start to look at
some of these some of this asynchronous
code you look at this set timeout thing
and see what it does so the first thing
I'm going to do is I'm actually going to
write my callback function so I'm just
gonna make it be a function called say
hello that says hook and I can call this
and when I run my code now no timers
experiment yes I get my Hello message
printed out in you know we can answer
I'd like another console.log as well to
say like this is the scar okay so if we
to delay saying hello by say two seconds
we could use let's delete that we could
use set timeout and give it those two
inputs first of all the callback so you
want us say hello function and then the
time so two seconds is 2,000
milliseconds now usually when we call a
function we we add those like
parentheses at the ends so that we would
do something like this and we're not
going to do that here because we don't
want to call the function right away
we're just giving the function to set
timeout and saying like do this when
your timer finishes so this says after
2,000 milliseconds run the say hello
function so what we should see now is
this is the start gets printed and then
after 2,000 milliseconds or two seconds
we should say hello printed as well as
the start and now after a little delay
we get hello as well let's just watch
that again
so what if we do this now we've got a
consulate log the start of our program
saying this is a start
I'll set time out saying say hello and
then another con sort of log at the end
of our program I want you to like just
take a moment and like maybe pause the
video if you need to I have a think
about this and come up with a bit of a
prediction for what you think is gonna
get printed out when we run this okay
let's give it a go see if you were right
okay so that might not have been what we
were expecting from just reading the
code as is we might have thought you
know we've got this is the start and
then say hello after two seconds and
then this is the end we maybe would have
expected to say see this is the start
hello this is the end but instead what
we thought is this is the start this at
the end get printed out at almost
exactly the same time and then two
seconds afterwards hello gets printed on
what this is showing is that set timeout
is asynchronous rather than these lines
of code executing in order set timeout
happens asynchronously so out of order
with the rest of the code so what this
actually does is it prints out this is
the start and then it sort of creates
this countdown timer somewhere in the
background inside node and then it
prints out this is the end and then it's
only a little bit later once that
countdown timer has gotten to
zero that say hello actually gets run
and we get hello printed out so let's
try something else how to say goodbye
function and add another set timeout
here she doesn't change you stand say
this is the middle another set timeout
with our say goodbye and this one I'm
gonna set I'm gonna set that one to
2,000 milliseconds and I'm going to
change us pay hello to 4,000
milliseconds and then that's confident
log this is the end so again have a look
at this code we should see five lines
printed out this is the start and our
hellos our goodbyes I'm a little bit in
the N bit but I want you to try and
think based on what we just saw with set
timeout on say hello what you think the
output of this is gonna be again I'm
gonna give you a little bit of time just
to think about that before we run the
code and see what happens
you
okay let's try that so we get this is
the start this is the middle this is the
end then after a couple of seconds
goodbye after a couple more seconds
hello
so if that's what you expected then well
done but if not then the reason for that
is again as we run through this code we
get this to start printed out then we
create a timer for four seconds and
straight away like before waiting for
that timer to finish go on this is the
middle then we create another timer for
two seconds without waiting for it to
finish and go onto this is the end and
then first of all our two second timer
finishes so we get say goodbye and we
get goodbye printed and then our four
second timer finishes so we get hello
printed and this really is the is it
this is the essence of async code the
only other thing that like you're likely
to see written quite a lot is rather
than having named functions like this we
can use anonymous functions in the same
way that we use anonymous functions in
our tests so instead of having say
goodbye here we can put the whole
function declaration in there and even
remove the name so we just end up with
this function settimeout function hello
for four seconds and then we can do the
same with the by using two different
anonymous functions in here so it's up
to you as to whether or not you think
this is actually easier to read or not I
don't think it is I think I always try
and like name my callback functions or
not always but a lot of the time I try
and have separate named callback
functions but you will see them written
like this as well and
can be read like this as well again
let's just run this again and we should
see the output now that we've made that
little refactor is exactly the same as
what it was before pause the video now
and spend a little bit of time playing
around with some of these things like
what happens if you put a set timeout in
a set timeout or like what happens if
you like change your order of things or
all of that sort of stuff
just play around a little bit so the
next thing that I want to do is look at
how we get so this is how we run code
but you know often with these functions
we need some sort of response from them
as well so I wanted to look a little bit
how that works so I'm just gonna create
a new file and call it slow add a s and
we're going to take a normal function
add takes a B and add them together so
we have this we have this add function
that just takes two inputs adds them and
returns the result so just to test that
out add 13 and 4 should give us a 17
node store address 17 there we go
but what would happen if parvis was like
something slow part of this involve like
a network request or something like that
so we're gonna this is like a little bit
of a contrived example so sorry for that
but we're gonna like change this ad
into a slow add so add that with a set
timeout in it that makes it take two
seconds to run instead of running
instantly so let's start off by copying
that definition crazy mom for slow-add
instead so the first thing that we might
try doing if we wanted this to take two
seconds
is adding one of our set timeout
examples from before so I could add a
set timeout in here and just take the
stuff inside a bath and add it in there
so now we're doing 20 of slow-add we've
got a and B and we're turning the
returning the result of the set timer so
let's try doing that now let's do
console dot log slow add 1314 and see
what happens undefined
except our program didn't finish quite
as soon as we learn to it took a couple
of seconds to finish which usually means
something more interesting is happening
under the hood as well so the reason we
got undefined is our return is in this
set timeout function so we're returning
from the set timeout but not from our
main function here so we're not going to
get the result given to us in here so
maybe we could try moving that outside
returning result there so add our things
together after two seconds and then
return the result maybe that would work
okay now we're getting reference our
result is not defined and the reason for
that is we created this result variable
inside this function in here which means
it's not visible outside of that we
can't return the result here even if it
was visible because we haven't added
them together yet like this all because
that timeout is asynchronous this won't
block and we'll move straight on to
trying to do return result before we've
even added anything together
and it turns out that we can't actually
use return in asynchronous functions in
the way we normally would we need to
have them accept and use a call back as
well so rather than consult logging the
result of so that this would only work
if apps were added was going to return
immediately but it doesn't because it's
asynchronous so we have to do something
a little bit weird instead so if we take
our slow add of 13 and for that we have
from before whoo I did a rhyme yay and
add a callback to the end then we can
get the result so we have to pass in a
third input which is our callback
function and this function is going to
have as an input to it the the result of
the adding of things so I'm gonna call
it the answer because it's just another
variable and I can give it any name at 1
and I'm going to console dot log the
answer and now in our slow add we need
to make it aware of that extra extra
input so I'm gonna call that callback
because that's our callback function and
what I'm gonna do is where before we
would have had return result
instead of return now we can use call
our callback to say that we're done so
instead of return result I can call call
back with the result this is really
weird
just just so you know like if you're not
really following this like that's fine
this is like kind of like very very odd
and complicated we've got like a lot of
functions going around and our functions
are now like tied together and like a
really weird way that we haven't seen
before but if we run this now we should
see if I add console dot log start and
console dot log end then we should see
I'll start an end run right away and
then after two seconds that's I'm not
come to the login here we get timer
finished and we should get the result of
adding those two numbers together so if
I run that starting in straightaway and
then after a couple of seconds I get
timer finished and my result so just to
talk you through what's happening here
we create our slow-add function that
takes two inputs to add together and
then the callback for when it's done and
we say wait two seconds and once you've
done that run this function in here and
what that function does after two
seconds is it logs out kind of finished
it adds our inputs together and then it
calls the callback with that answer to
give it back to the thing that called it
so we don't use return when we're
writing functions that use callbacks and
then down here where we call it we give
it thirteen and four for a and B
then we have this anonymous function for
the the callback that's gonna get given
this the answer here is the same as
result here that goes into here and like
gets console or locked out and this is
how like a lot of these places but we've
seen these like anonymous functions like
rocker and stuff this is how maka works
it's calling your function like when
it's ready to do whatever its thing is
but as I say like if the stuff I just
covered went over your head a little bit
don't worry too much about it if you're
curious then like there's some really
good resources out there that you can
find or come and speak to one of us but
otherwise like don't sweat this little
bit that we just did here too much so
long as you understand this idea of like
these things can run out of order
because that's like the main thing okay
let's try and do something actually
useful and I've got this little API
for daug so I'm going to open up
insomnia and show you what it looks like
let's I want to do its ignore all this
time spit bigger cool I want to do a get
request to this special API that I have
HTTP ADA - dog doc doc Heroku app calm
and this is an API that will give us dog
facts so we can go a to dog facts
aircraft or comm slash facts slash
random and send a get request and takes
a moment to start up in this mate
Internet is broken here we go we should
get a response back with an ID so the
the unique identifier for that fact
and the actual fact itself so you try me
run this
we should get back a new dog fact random
dog fact from my API we can also ask for
like specific numbers so if I ask the
fact 10 then it's always going to return
fact with the ID 10 and what we're going
to do now is look at how we can get a
random dog fact like make a request to
this API from our code because what we
can do then is start to automate all of
the tests that we wrote for the today's
API so rather than us having to go
through and manually do those things in
insomnia ourselves we can write a bit of
code and do all of them automatically so
I'm gonna add a new file called request
experiment dot yes and we're going to
use a library to do this from NPM we're
going to use something called super
agent and super agent is a way of making
HTTP requests from node so I'm just
going to google it super agent here we
go by this person called visual media
and it's got this great ferret who I
believe is actually called Toby Toby
maybe Toby I think this is the person
who wrote this this is their ferret so
that's that's very good very important
for your open source project to have a
mascot with our hat anyway so we would
install this with NPM the same way we
usually would with like ma crochet NPM
install super-agent if you've already
run NPM install on this project then
you'll find that super agent was listed
in the package dot jason so you should
already
have it so we can require it the same
way we would anything else super agent
equals require super agent and now we
can use super agent for making requests
so there's a little example here request
post and then a path send for sending
Jason along with a body a way of setting
some of the different headers and stuff
and then at the end we've got our
callback we don't actually need a lot of
these options there some some example
here like using a query string and stuff
and if you read through this where is it
yeah there's a link here at the top of
the document that says Docs if you just
click on that you can see like there's
all the things you want to do here like
here's the thing for get requests so if
I click on that it's showing me how to
make the request and like add queries
and stuff to it you might see in these
docs this doc then and I will ignore the
dot then that's for promises which we're
not going to be covering here instead
we're gonna use something called end
which is the sort of cool backi way of
doing things so let's have a go super
agent don't forget i'm gonna type in the
URL for our our what's a cool dog fact
api ada dog
Heroku come slash facts and let's just
get fact number 100 so super agent
thought get this and then dot end which
tell super agent like we're finished
like making our request we've ended
making like telling me you what the
request would be like send it and give
us a result
and we're going to give our callback
function to that now this function is
going to get two different things first
of all it's two different inputs first
of all it's going to get an error and
then it's gonna get a response from the
server what I'm going to do to start off
with is console.log the error and I'm
gonna come for the log a few bits and
pieces from their response as well so
the status code response the status and
the contents of it the body response dot
body so that should be all of the data
that we got sent back to us if I run
this now requests experiment and we get
this little warning which you could know
about experimental features and we get
error no sir no error that's good we get
status code of 200 which if we just go
and check the cat slash 200 200 okay
amazing so that is a successful response
code and then we get the body so we get
the ID which is a hundred and then the
fact itself so that all data works
pretty well
one thing that's important to do though
so this error response thing is really
really common in node the convention
with callback functions is if it's
something that can go wrong then the
first input to the callback is error and
then the second thing is like the actual
result and it's a really good idea to
add an if to say like oh if there's an
error like
handle it basically do something so I'm
gonna just cancel the lock era and I'm
gonna return because return like return
nothing just stops the rest of the code
in this function from running so if
there's an error log what the error is
and then stop don't go on to try and do
these things if there's an error if I
changes to try and produce an error now
if I send it to somewhere that it
doesn't exist like instead of a dead dog
fax if I go and add a cat facts which we
don't have and try and run it then if we
scroll up to the top of all of this
stuff as a bunch of it and we see error
not found and where happened the status
and response and all that sort of stuff
so that sort of works okay then you get
like a bunch of this other crap as well
which is all kind of like nodes internal
stuff about how it makes requests and
all that sort of stuff which we don't
really care about so yeah that's
basically all there is to it
so we make a request here and then in
our callback function we handle the
response we can get like a sales code
and the body and anything else that we
want all of the information about what
you need to do here is in the super
agent Docs so pause the video and spend
a little bit of time like playing around
with this for now it's super super cool
after that part two of this is writing
some tests for this facts dog facts API
and we have a few already stubbed out in
here if I run them now then oh my I'm
wrong oh I didn't finish writing you out
let's see of me but hurry back on there
we go so we run
test tests then we've got a few that
have green ticks already and a few that
are coming up as pending which just
means that like I've written the
description for the test
I haven't actually given them content
yet so it's gonna be up to you to write
the content of the test so actually like
talks to the API and does something but
I just wanted to talk you through how
those tests are working before you go
went like welcome them on your own
so the first couple of lines of this
file were the same as we've had before
so importing chai and Choi's version of
expect to make assertions with and then
we're also requiring this thing called
super test and super test is made by the
same person that makes super agent oops
super thirst and it's basically the
exact same thing except it's aimed at
writing unit tests or sorry not unit has
writing automated API tests so what we
do is we run the super test function
with our public main URL for our API and
now we can use this API to like make
requests to this thing I'm using
describe to a group together like
similar sorts of requests so get all of
the get requests to fact slash random
I'm going to put in here and then I have
each of these tests with an assertion so
we look at the first one it returns a
200 status code so we're gonna make a
request to the fact slash random API and
try and check that it gets a 200 status
code so as usual we pass in this
anonymous function but we've got this
extra thing here this has done this
extra input and that's actually a
callback function so when we have our
tests can be asynchronous as well and we
need to let maka know when we're
finished running them but luckily
because like super test is already set
up
we don't need to worry about actually
calling done ourselves we just need to
make sure that we give done to that end
thing basically say like once this
requests like finished make sure that
you like run the dumb thing again like
if this is something you're unsure about
don't worry about it
just make sure that you end each of
these things with it
got ends done because that couldn't make
things work the way this works is we're
saying API so our super test API with
this URL in it don't get facts such
random so get that path on this URL and
then expect 200 is expecting a 200
status code and then that end done that
we already talked about when we run that
now we get the 200 say this code green
tick next to it we go off to see it took
230 milliseconds to run the next one
checks that the body of response has a
number in it called ID so we do the same
thing we used for done and we make an
API request a fact slash random and then
we do not expect again except instead of
just giving it a number for the status
code we give it this anonymous function
that takes the response and then we can
do whatever we want with the response so
here we're using Chai's expect to expect
response body dot ID to be a number so
the ID should be a number that's all
this says again with it done and then
you're going to have a few of these
things where you have like a task and
you'll have an it without function and
all you need to do here is make sure the
add a function in that actually provides
the body the the content of this test
that actually runs the code that's
basically it if you have any questions
there's no on slack or in person and
good luck